---
title: "A Pilot Study on Convolutional Neural Networks for Motion Estimation From Ultrasound Images"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-12-01-ewan
excerpt: 'This paper benchmarks different convolutional neural network algorithms for motion estimation in ultrasound imaging. We evaluated and compared several networks derived from FlowNet2, one of the most efficient architectures in computer vision..'
date: 2020-12-01
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control'
paperurl: 'https://hal.science/hal-03027193'
citation: 'Evain, Ewan (2020). &quot;A Pilot Study on Convolutional Neural Networks for Motion Estimation From Ultrasound Images.&quot; <i>IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control</i>. 67(12).'
---
In recent years, deep learning has been successfully applied to the analysis and processing of ultrasound images. To date, most of this research has focused on segmentation and view recognition. This paper benchmarks different convolutional neural network algorithms for motion estimation in ultrasound imaging. We evaluated and compared several networks derived from FlowNet2, one of the most efficient architectures in computer vision. The networks were tested with and without transfer learning and the best configuration was compared against the particle-imaging-velocimetry method, a popular state-of-the-art block-matching algorithm. Rotations are known to be difficult to track from ultrasound images due to a significant speckle decorrelation. We thus focused on images of rotating disks, that could be tracked through speckle features only. Our database consisted of synthetic and in-vitro B-mode images after log-compression, and covered a large range of rotational speeds. One of the FlowNet2 sub-networks, FlowNet2SD, produced competitive results with a motion field error smaller than 1 pixel on real data after transfer learning based on simulated data. These errors remains small for a large velocity range without the need for hyper-parameter tuning, which indicates the high potential and adaptability of deep learning solutions to motion estimation in ultrasound imaging.
