---
title: "A Pipeline for the Generation of Synthetic Cardiac Color Doppler"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-06-01-yunyun
excerpt: 'We present a numerical framework for generating clinical-like Color Doppler imaging. Synthetic blood vector fields were obtained from a patient-specific computational fluid dynamics CFD model.'
date: 2022-06-01
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control'
paperurl: 'https://cnrs.hal.science/hal-03538666'
citation: 'Sun, Yunyun (2022). &quot;A Pipeline for the Generation of Synthetic Cardiac Color Doppler.&quot; <i>IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control</i>. 69(3).'
---
Color Doppler imaging (CDI) is the modality of choice for simultaneous visualization of myocardium and intracavitary flow over a wide scan area. This visualization modality is subject to several sources of error, the main ones being aliasing and clutter. Mitigation of these artifacts is a major concern for better analysis of intracardiac flow. One option to address these issues is through simulations. In this article, we present a numerical framework for generating clinical-like CDI. Synthetic blood vector fields were obtained from a patient-specific computational fluid dynamics CFD model. Realistic texture and clutter artifacts were simulated from real clinical ultrasound cineloops. We simulated several scenarios highlighting the effects of 1) flow acceleration; 2) wall clutter; and 3) transmit wavefronts, on Doppler velocities. As a comparison, an “ideal” color Doppler was also simulated, without these harmful effects. This synthetic dataset is made publicly available and can be used to evaluate the quality of Doppler estimation techniques. Besides, this approach can be seen as a first step toward the generation of comprehensive datasets for training neural networks to improve the quality of Doppler imaging
