---
title: "Motion Estimation by Deep Learning in 2D Echocardiography: Synthetic Dataset and Validation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-08-01-ewan
excerpt: 'We propose a novel deep learning solution for motion estimation in echocardiography. In parallel, we designed a novel simulation pipeline allowing the generation of a large amount of realistic B-mode sequences.'
date: 2022-08-01
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging'
paperurl: 'https://hal.science/hal-03603014'
citation: 'Evain, Ewan (2022). &quot;Motion Estimation by Deep Learning in 2D Echocardiography: Synthetic Dataset and Validation.&quot; <i>IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging</i>. 41(8).'
---
Motion estimation in echocardiography plays an important role in the characterization of cardiac function, allowing the computation of myocardial deformation indices. However, there exist limitations in clinical practice, particularly with regard to the accuracy and robustness of measurements extracted from images. We therefore propose a novel deep learning solution for motion estimation in echocardiography. Our network corresponds to a modified version of PWC-Net which achieves high performance on ultrasound sequences. In parallel, we designed a novel simulation pipeline allowing the generation of a large amount of realistic B-mode sequences. These synthetic data, together with strategies during training and inference, were used to improve the performance of our deep learning solution, which achieved an average endpoint error of 0.07± 0.06 mm per frame and 1.20±0.67 mm between ED and ES on our simulated dataset. The performance of our method was further investigated on 30 patients from a publicly available clinical dataset acquired from a GE system. The method showed promise by achieving a mean absolute error of the global longitudinal strain of 2.5 ± 2.1% and a correlation of 0.77 compared to GLS derived from manual segmentation, much better than one of the most efficient methods in the state-of-the-art (namely the FFT-Xcorr block-matching method). We finally evaluated our method on an auxiliary dataset including 30 patients from another center and acquired with a different system. Comparable results were achieved, illustrating the ability of our method to maintain high performance regardless of the echocardiographic data processed.
